content/posts/goals-for-2026.md, before:

---
title: "Goals for 2026"
date: 2025-12-23T07:18:30+01:00
draft: true
showtoc: true
---

## Introduction

2024 was a big year in terms of growth for me. I spent a lot of time getting
out of my comfort zone and saying yes to everything I could. I had a lot of new
experiences and learnt a lot about myself as a person.

2025 built on that but didn't push the boundary quite so much. Life was really
good and I felt much more comfortable in my own skin, but it's hard to point to
quite as many new experiences.

I've never been one for goal setting, but perhaps now is a good time to change
that and at least begin to experiment with it. I need to remind myself that
being stationary won't end well, so setting some direction and measurable goals
feels sensible.

Each section will outline an area of my life, where I find myself currently and
areas where I could push myself in the upcoming year. Some goals will be highly
measurable, others will be based more on feel. I'll start by reviewing them
every month to allow myself to course correct frequently, but this may reduce
over the span of the year.

## Professional Growth

- Career aspirations and progression
- Technical skills to develop
- Impact you want to have at work
- Projects you want to tackle
- Professional relationships to build

## Creative Output

- Technical writing and blogging goals
- Blogging frequency (e.g., 1 post/month)
- Topics you want to explore
- Building an audience or community
- Side projects or open source contributions

## Health & Fitness

- Physical goals and what progress looks like
- Triathlon training plans and milestones
- Habits you want to build (exercise, nutrition, sleep)
- How you want to feel physically
- Consistency and sustainability

## Relationships & Social Life

- Romantic relationship goals
- Platonic friendships (deepening existing, making new)
- Being more present with people
- Social activities or communities to join
- Quality time and meaningful connections

## Financial Literacy & Growth

- Learning about investing and financial markets
- Specific financial milestones or targets
- Building knowledge in this area
- Concrete steps to take (reading, courses, advisors)
- Long-term financial planning

## Hobbies & Exploration

- Getting outside your comfort zone
- New experiences you want to try
- Interests to pursue or develop
- Saying yes to opportunities
- Balance between structured and spontaneous activities

## Home & Environment

- Creating a space that supports your goals
- Small improvements or changes
- Organization and decluttering
- Making your environment more functional or enjoyable

## Staying Accountable

- How you'll check in on progress (monthly, quarterly)
- What success looks like for each area
- How you'll adjust course if needed
- Who or what will keep you accountable
- Celebrating wins along the way

Commit message:

feat: add creative writing goals

content/posts/goals-for-2026.md, after:

---
title: "Goals for 2026"
date: 2025-12-23T07:18:30+01:00
draft: true
showtoc: true
---

## Introduction

2024 was a big year in terms of growth for me. I spent a lot of time getting
out of my comfort zone and saying yes to everything I could. I had a lot of new
experiences and learnt a lot about myself as a person.

2025 built on that but didn't push the boundary quite so much. Life was really
good and I felt much more comfortable in my own skin, but it's hard to point to
quite as many new experiences.

I've never been one for goal setting, but perhaps now is a good time to change
that and at least begin to experiment with it. I need to remind myself that
being stationary won't end well, so setting some direction and measurable goals
feels sensible.

Each section will outline an area of my life, where I find myself currently and
areas where I could push myself in the upcoming year. Some goals will be highly
measurable, others will be based more on feel. I'll start by reviewing them
every month to allow myself to course correct frequently, but this may reduce
over the span of the year.

## Professional Growth

- Career aspirations and progression
- Technical skills to develop
- Impact you want to have at work
- Projects you want to tackle
- Professional relationships to build

## Creative Output

I've always loved good quality technical writing, where the author either
reduces a complex topic down to the very basics or dives unreasonably deep into
something you felt like you already knew well.

As part of this, I've done some technical writing of my own over the past
couple of years. Lots of this has been internal to my professional life where I
have written long-form blog posts about how we do things at Starling or
problems we have run into, but I've also started writing more adhoc outside of
work (although still in a technical capacity).

Writing for my own blog gives me a little bit more freedom in terms of what I
talk about and the style of communication, as well as feeling like there's a
lower bar for entry as it won't be used to assess me professionally quite so
much. Announcing a blog post to hundreds of engineers I work with feels like
being in the spotlight more.

As part of this area, I'd like to commit to writing at least one blog post per
month. This will stretch me both in terms of writing skills as well as
organisation as some months may be quite busy and I'd still like to hit that
target. I'll need to run ahead a little in terms of topics, just so I don't get
to the end of a month and have no idea what to write about.

## Health & Fitness

- Physical goals and what progress looks like
- Triathlon training plans and milestones
- Habits you want to build (exercise, nutrition, sleep)
- How you want to feel physically
- Consistency and sustainability

## Relationships & Social Life

- Romantic relationship goals
- Platonic friendships (deepening existing, making new)
- Being more present with people
- Social activities or communities to join
- Quality time and meaningful connections

## Financial Literacy & Growth

- Learning about investing and financial markets
- Specific financial milestones or targets
- Building knowledge in this area
- Concrete steps to take (reading, courses, advisors)
- Long-term financial planning

## Hobbies & Exploration

- Getting outside your comfort zone
- New experiences you want to try
- Interests to pursue or develop
- Saying yes to opportunities
- Balance between structured and spontaneous activities

## Home & Environment

- Creating a space that supports your goals
- Small improvements or changes
- Organization and decluttering
- Making your environment more functional or enjoyable

## Staying Accountable

- How you'll check in on progress (monthly, quarterly)
- What success looks like for each area
- How you'll adjust course if needed
- Who or what will keep you accountable
- Celebrating wins along the way
